---
title: "Simon's significance in Golding's Lord of The Flies"
date: 2021-01-28
description: ""
draft: false
tags: [
    "english",
    "lord of the flies",
    "simon",
    "william golding",
]
---
Simon is, perhaps, the only character in the novel to symbolise Golding's piety following the horrors he faced during his time serving in the British Navy. Monteith cut almost references and symbolism of religion out of the original draft, being an agnostic himself. In the beginning of the book, Simon reaches up into the trees to feed the desperate littluns' hands below, ensuring they get "double handfuls". Simon is, in this passage, physically higher than the greedy littluns, almost suggesting he is metaphorically higher, too. The Creator art in Heaven, and will forever be higher and mightier than the mortals living on Earth — just as Simon has ascended. But in ascending, he feeds the greed of mankind, noting that the littluns receive "double" handfuls. This draws a strong parallel to Adam and Eve in the Book of Genesis' Garden of Eden; initially Adam and Eve are sinless, as depicted by their nudity -- but they eat the Forbidden Fruit, and they descend to be forever mortal, locked out of the Garden.

Simon's revelation "maybe it's only us" resonates deeply with the core message of Golding's philosophy. Original sin describes the doctrine that humans become tainted at birth. Simon seems to recognise this in everyone on the island, yet he remains, constantly, untainted by the island. His run-in with the Lord of the Flies furthers his Christ imagery, almost like Jesus' 40 days in the desert. The Lord of the Flies seems to voice all of Simon's insecurities and doubts, almost like the Devil reading a list of sin upon entry to eternal Hell. Lord of the Flies is a translation of the Hebrew 'Beelzebub', which in theology, is a metonym for Satan. This implies the Devil is also external, contradicting Simon's "maybe it's only us". But this need not be the case, since the conversation was a figment of Simon's imagination. So perhaps Golding, the narrator, and only person to call the pig the Lord of the Flies, believes Satan is external. 

As Simon is brutally killed by the boys, we can see the state of paranoia the island has imposed on the minds of the boys; the thought that the beast lurks wherever he pleases, but is never seen puts the boys constantly on edge. It's darkly ironic that as Simon comes to nullify the beast, he is struck down as a result of the paranoia the beast has caused. The "crowd" "screamed, struck, bit, tore" at Simon as they cannot recognise him and assume he is the beast. The crowd, in this way, acts like a skulk of foxes — and by this point have lost all identity, and most of all, individuality (arguably the most defining human trait). The fact that both the crowd and Simon are both unidentifiable symbolises the paranoid mindset felt in the period when Golding wrote the book. The Cold War represented a time when no-one knew where the enemy was, nor what their plans were. Ultimately, Simon is killed by the very original sin that he had tried to tell people of, and it was his inability to counterbalance the Freudian id as superego that got himself killed.